## The Power of Breathwork for Stress Management

During high-pressure moments and high-stress situations, attempting to control our minds or use our thoughts to change how we feel often proves futile – when did telling yourself to stay calm actually work? Instead, we can use our bodies to help us – one of the most effective methods to tap into our mental resilience and bounce back from stress is breathwork.

### The Breathwork Advantage

When we encounter stress, our body's autonomic nervous system is activated, leading to the "fight or flight" response. However, conscious and intentional breathwork can engage the parasympathetic nervous system, promoting the "rest and digest" response. This shift in our physiological state can effectively reduce stress and anxiety.

### Emotion Regulation: A Powerful Tool

Studies have shown that each emotion corresponds to a distinct breathing pattern – typically our emotions are automatically influencing the way we breathe. More importantly, the studies also revealed that the reverse is possible – deliberate breathing can influence our emotional state. For example, in a study involving stressed executives in a high-pressure decision-making situation, getting them to follow simple breathwork instructions proved effective in reducing their anxiety levels. We have the ability to change how we feel by harnessing the power of our breath.

### Consistency Is Key

Breathwork does not only provide immediate effects; it offers lasting benefits. Research shows regular breathwork normalises the level of cortisol (the stress hormone) in the long run. Outside of doing breathwork for a specific situation (i.e. a stressful meeting or interaction), it’s recommended to make breathwork a habit for greater impact. Integrate it effortlessly into your daily routine, whether it's at the start of your day, during your commute, or part of your bedtime ritual.

### Explore Breathwork Techniques

There are various breathwork techniques out there, each with unique advantages, some of which include: calming the nervous system, anxiety and stress management, and increasing focus. Here, we step you through 2 options: Cyclic Sighing and Alternate Nostril Breathing.

### Technique: Cyclic Sighing

This simple breathwork discovered by a team of scientists at Standford helps you reduce anxiety and stress in the moment:

Procedure:
First (short) inhale through your nose. 
Next, take a second, deeper breath to fully expand your lungs. 
Then slowly exhale all the air through your mouth. 

Repeat this for about 5 minutes for maximum benefit.

### Technique: Alternate Nostril Breathing

With regular practice, alternate nostril breathing can bring better balance to your nervous system and less stress response and activity over time.

Procedure:
  1. With your right hand*:
    - Place the index and middle finger between the eyebrows.
    - Place the thumb on the right nostril and the ring finger on the left nostril – lightly touching.
  2. Close the right nostril (with the thumb). Take a deep inhale through the left nostril. Close the left nostril (with the ring finger) and open the thumb to exhale fully through the right nostril.
  3. Take a deep inhale through the right nostril. Close the right nostril (with the thumb) and open the ring finger to exhale fully through your left nostril.

Then start over. Do this for 10 rounds on each nostril, or for at least 2 minutes.

*You can rest your left hand on your lap with your palms facing up.
